sot-109-chapter-1 (#37)
sota-zk-lab/zkp-documents: articles/zcash-protocol/chapter_1.md

**Protocol Deep Dive:**
- **Abstract protocol:** Defines the ideal components of Zcash, including functions for generating proofs, verifying their validity, and managing shielded addresses.
- **Concrete protocol:** Explains how these ideal functions are implemented using specific cryptographic algorithms and data structures.
- **Network upgrades:** Outlines the process for introducing new features and functionality to Zcash over time, ensuring its ongoing development and evolution.

**Beyond Transparency:**
- **Consensus changes from Bitcoin:** Zcash deviates from Bitcoin's Proof-of-Work consensus mechanism to accommodate shielded transactions efficiently.
- **Differences from Zerocash:** The document analyzes the key modifications Zcash made to the original Zerocash protocol, improving security, performance, and usability.

**Technical Appendix:**
- **Circuit design:** Provides detailed insights into how Sapling circuits, the mathematical core of zk-SNARKs, are designed and implemented.
- **Batching optimizations:** Explains techniques for verifying multiple signatures and proofs simultaneously, improving efficiency and scalability.

### 1.1 High-level Overview
---

> - This overview contains the ideas behind the protocol, but it is imprecise in some aspects and is not a part of the normative protocol specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!WARNING]
> This is the high-level idea so it is imprecise in some aspects.
```

> - Also, this overview applies to Sprout, Sapling, and Orchard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Zcash uses different value pools to manage transparent and shielded transactions. The transparent pool works similarly to Bitcoin, while shielded pools (Sprout, Sapling, Orchard) leverage notes for encrypted transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two types of transactions in Zcash:

Transparent transactions (similar to Bitcoin's).
Shielded (encrypted) transactions.
```

> - These notes contain amounts, shielded addresses, spending keys, and commitments for verification. To prevent double-spending, nullifiers linked to spending keys invalidate used notes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Shielded transactions contain amounts, shielded addresses, spending keys, and commitments for verification. To prevent double-spending, nullifiers linked to spending keys to invalidate used transactions. 
```

- Transactions can combine transparent and shielded parts, with special descriptions for shielded transfers. [zk-SNARKs](../../terms/zkSNARK.md) ensure transaction validity and privacy without revealing any details.

> - Additionally, shielded addresses include transmission keys for secure note communication between parties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Shielded addresses include transmission keys for secure note communication between parties.
```

> - Notably, Sapling and Orchard allow for full viewing keys, granting authorized users the ability to see a note's content without the power to spend it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Sapling and Orchard allow for full viewing keys, granting authorized users the ability to see a note's content without the power to spend it.
```

---
Title: Introduction
Status: Done
Level: "1"
---
# Chapter 1: Introduction
---

> Zcash, an evolution of the Zerocash protocol, bridges the gap between transparent Bitcoin transactions and shielded payments enabled by zk-SNARKs (zero-knowledge succinct non-interactive arguments of knowledge). This document delves into the technical intricacies of Zcash, guiding readers through its concepts, abstract and concrete protocols, network upgrades, and key differentiators from both Bitcoin and Zerocash.

Reviewer: Replace zk-SNARKs (zero-knowledge succinct non-interactive arguments of knowledge) by just `zk-SNARKs` and link it to the right document

> Zcash, an evolution of the Zerocash protocol, bridges the gap between transparent Bitcoin transactions and shielded payments enabled by zk-SNARKs (zero-knowledge succinct non-interactive arguments of knowledge). This document delves into the technical intricacies of Zcash, guiding readers through its concepts, abstract and concrete protocols, network upgrades, and key differentiators from both Bitcoin and Zerocash.

Reviewer: ~~This document delves into the technical intricacies of Zcash, guiding readers through its concepts, abstract and concrete protocols, network upgrades, and key differentiators from both Bitcoin and Zerocash.~~

**Protocol Deep Dive:**
- **Abstract protocol:** Defines the ideal components of Zcash, including functions for generating proofs, verifying their validity, and managing shielded addresses.
- **Concrete protocol:** Explains how these ideal functions are implemented using specific cryptographic algorithms and data structures.
- **Network upgrades:** Outlines the process for introducing new features and functionality to Zcash over time, ensuring its ongoing development and evolution.

**Beyond Transparency:**
- **Consensus changes from Bitcoin:** Zcash deviates from Bitcoin's Proof-of-Work consensus mechanism to accommodate shielded transactions efficiently.
- **Differences from Zerocash:** The document analyzes the key modifications Zcash made to the original Zerocash protocol, improving security, performance, and usability.

**Technical Appendix:**
- **Circuit design:** Provides detailed insights into how Sapling circuits, the mathematical core of zk-SNARKs, are designed and implemented.
- **Batching optimizations:** Explains techniques for verifying multiple signatures and proofs simultaneously, improving efficiency and scalability.

### 1.1 Caution
---

> Zcash's security hinges on strict adherence to consensus by all programs interacting with the network. Deviations, regardless of cause - bug, documentation error, or unexpected third-party behavior - can compromise or nullify its security, potentially causing user losses.

Reviewer: What is the purpose of adding these info?

Despite this potential danger, a formal and clear specification of intended behavior remains crucial for analyzing Zcash's security, understanding its protocol, and maintaining its software ecosystem. If you discover any inaccuracies in this specification, reporting them immediately helps safeguard Zcash and its users.

### 1.2 High-level Overview
---

> This overview contains the ideas behind the protocol, but it is imprecise in some aspects and is not a part of the normative protocol specification. Also, this overview applies to Sprout, Sapling, and Orchard.

Reviewer: Too many info, split this paragraph into multiple ones
